---
chapter: 04
---

I could write a whole book on Open AI and its gradual evolution from an
apparently humanitarian effort to apply technology for the betterment of
society, into the organization leading the charge of artificial intelligence as
a socially transformative technology.

One particularly intriguing part of Open AI is its valuation. As with a range of
modern technology companies, the valuation of Open AI has almost nothing to do
with its sales. Instead, its valuation is based almost entirely on its
*potential* for future market domination.[^Tesla] With this kind of company,
it is increasingly common for the bottom line to become almost irrelevant 
compared to, say, "fear of missing out"

A second illuminating aspect of Open AI is its response to regulation. It has
been a vocal advocate for self-regulation, and against government intervention
-- except where that government intervention is to formally recognize
self-regulation, which doesn't count. It has led this strand of its activity in
a novel way. 

The traditional approach corporations take to regulation is: lobbying
governments to minimize its impact, or when regulation is inevitable, to try to
capture the regulator. Lobbying is the first strategy, persuading legislators
not to regulate, and supporting the elections of those friendly to the industry.
Later, when (and if) there is a relatively powerful regulatory body in place,
the second strategy comes into play, trying to take control of the regulator,
lobbying to appoint former employees, friendly lawyers, or other third parties.
With them in place, even if the regulations are established, their impact on the
industry can be minimized. 

Open AI did do lobbying, but it also took a new third approach: acting as if it
was an equal of governments, able to negotiate with them as a new kind of
corporation -- one outside the sphere of influence of governments entirely. The
actual discussions were not the important part: this was performance designed,
in large measure, to establish the technology companies as the only actors
capable of making decisions about the technology -- a kind of self-regulation on
steroids. 

[^Tesla]:
    Another good example is Tesla, which, relative to its actual sales,
    is valued very differently to its competitors. One could argue: 
    that is because it's not a car company but a technology company. 
    This is a reasonable analysis, but it is incomplete: why would a 
    technology company have such a different valuation? Because technology
    companies are, as a whole, not valued on current sales but on future
    potential.

Open AI was founded in ???? by ????. 

