---
chapter: 2
title: Reflexive modernity
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

For the past five centuries or so, particularly in the Western
world[^WesternWorld], there was a clear break from the medieval world, with its
strict hierarchies and agricultural economies. The modern world did not arrive
all at once, there were distinct stages —or surges — of development, that piece
by piece transformed the world into the modern, industrialized, interconnected
one that we see today. Generally speaking, so far there have been three phases
of modernization.

[^WesternWorld]: Yes, this is a more-than-a-little colonialist way of
    summarizing it — perhaps inevitably, given that colonialism was itself a
    product of this process of modernization. It is likely that the key phases
    were directly shaped by forces elsewhere — in particular, the Islamic Golden
    Age presaged early modernization by over a hundred years. Instead, the
    actual “Great Divergence” globally was primarily an effect of the classical
    modernization phase, not the early or late phases.

#### Early modernization (from around 1500 to the late 1700s)

Early modernization started with the Renaissance, the beginnings of global
connections across borders, and early experimental science. The power of
religious organizations was gradually eroded and replaced — for the most part —
with centralized governments. Technology was beginning to have an impact by the
end of the period, but the use of scientific knowledge to reorganize day to day
life was still in its infancy.

#### ‘Classical’ modernization (from the late 1700s to around 1900)

At this point, the Industrial Revolution itself took hold, and a recognizable world economy with global trading emerged. Governments began to shift towards democracies, and social movements criticizing them started to gain momentum. Technological innovations in transport and industry enabled urban centres to crystallize, and life within them to shift away from agricultural precursors into modern industrialized cities.

#### Late modernization (from around 1900 to 1989)

In late modernization, true globalization appeared, enabled by transformative communications technologies and transport systems. Manufacturing and services became global — as did wars and crises. Individual nation states started to decline in importance. Economic development took centre stage for policies, and global organizations like the WTO and the United Nations emerged and were major influences alongside other governing bodies.

---

A common theme throughout this whole modernization process is the theme of
*progress*. This was a marked break from the medieval world, where people were the
subjects of God, nature, and our lords and masters. In the medieval world, what
technological innovation there was (not much!, but one important example was the
mechanical clock) was firmly under the control of the Church and the nobles.
Modernization changed all this — progress itself became a Good Thing. We could
start to shape our environment, make a new and better world, improved over the
one that we inherited from our forbears. Along the way, we developed
technologies that both helped us shape the world — examples include the steam
engine, trains, industrial automation, electricity, the telegraph, radio — and
that, in turn, laid the foundations for the innovations yet to come.

Computers, when they finally came along, were the product as well as the tool of
modernization. Before the modern electronic computers we know today, the word
“computer” was a job title. Early computers, usually women, were people who
followed the steps of a mathematical process to implement computation at scale.
They were the ones who created the tables of logarithms and trigonometric
functions that enabled people to make calculations more efficient and more
accurate. The computers we know today are their replacements — they literally
simulate these human computers. As Bailey (1992) put it: ”Von Neumann and
Goldstine were not inventing the computer. They already knew what a computer
was, what a computer did, and how long it took a computer to do it.” So,
computers themselves are a perfect example of reflexive modernization — what was
created as a product of modern science, with very specific goals of improving
particular tasks, begins to transform everything else, including the society
that had created them in the first place. Although it might seem that no single
technology has been as pivotally influential as the computer, that’s not
strictly true, as these technologies come in layers, and computers themselves
build on the earlier innovations of electricity, switching, and communications.
And in the same way, artificial intelligence is another layer of transformation
on top of all of them. And it won’t be the last, I can promise you that. 

Although these three phases of modernization are recognizable and relatively
clear with the benefit of hindsight, there are different opinions on what
happened next. What is clear is that around the late 1970s, there was another
significant shift. Manufacturing industry started to decline in favour of
services, and there was a dramatic acceleration in the importance of knowledge
to the economy. It is very easy to personalize this as a policy decision by
those in power at the time — it was important to both Reagan’s and Thatcher’s
platforms. 

But another possibility is that the modern world literally came to an end, and
we entered a new, *post-modern* age. The other possibility is that, instead,
modernization accelerated but, if you like, turned inward rather than outward,
into a new phase of reflexive modernity. 

## The modernizing project breaks down: postmodernism

In the later stages of modernity, all was not well. Cracks were starting to show
in the progress — or, rather, unexpected side effects started to have surprising
effects. So, from the middle of the 20th century, in a wide range of fields,
there was an increasing question over whether modernism and its gradual
progressive improvement could be sustained. Especially after the 1950s, what had
then seemed to be an infinite source of optimism began to dry up. 

In language, for example, following Wittgenstein, words and categories no longer
seemed to have a solid basis in reality. Where, before, words seemed to be
precise tools to communicate from a writer to a reader, references to essential
characteristics of a real, objective world, that all started to fall apart. When
we talk about the colour, red, for example, there is no essence-of-redness;
instead, there is a ‘typical’ red, and there are crimson, ochre, fuschia, brown,
purple, which may or may not be red, at least partly depending on context. A lot
more of the world was turning out to be socially constructed, defined by
agreement and negotiation between people, rather than based on an objective real
world. 

Similarly, in ethics, we moved from a world where good and bad were clearly
distinguishable into a world filled with nuance and context, where nothing is
objectively right and nothing objectively wrong. Privacy is a good example:
there are genuine instances where absolute privacy can be harmful, and where
invading privacy can bring justice to those who need it. And yet, that exact
same loss of privacy can be intensely harmful in other instances. 

The result was a growing coalition of work around the end of the modern world —
postmodernism. This has a number of characteristics which distinguish it from
its modern predecessor.

*   **From objective to relative truth.** In postmodernism, there are no universal
	objective truths at all. Instead concepts such as redness are socially
	constructed. That doesn’t necessarily mean a complete free-for-all, but it
	does mean that culture, consensus, and other factors go into the pot. What
	redness is, is not completely arbitrary, but it doesn’t have pure essence
	either. Instead, we agree what it is as a society.[^SocialConstruct]

*   **Knowledge depends on context,** especially from politics and culture.
	Because these social factors play into knowledge, the boundaries become
	blurry, contested, and might be different for each of us. What I think is
	red, you might think is not red — maybe if you’re a professional artist with
	more subtle colour training, for example.

*   **Reflexivity.** A common characteristic of postmodernism is that it is
	reflexive or self-referential — it is particularly playful with concepts of
	representation. Recursion is a common theme, so are maps and indexes. 

[^SocialConstruct]: The distinction between “objective” on the one hand, and
    “socially constructed” on the other, is not always useful. Take the meter
    length unit, for instance. The meter is a social construct in the sense that
    it was created by consensus, even though it has evolved through several very
    different, objective, specifications, created by bodies such as the French
    National Assembly and the International Committee for Weights and Measures.
    So, it is both objective and a social construct. In effect, social
    construction is how something was established, not what was established.

The challenge, of course, is when to stop. If everything is relative, if there
is no grounding in any ‘real’ world, then surely, anything does. I can call
green ‘red’ if I want — and who can stop me? In the limit, radical postmodernism
seems to descend into a kind of reflexive absence of meaning. After all — if
words and concepts don’t have a pure essence of meaning to them, if they aren’t
in anyone’s head but instead are part of our social world, how is it possible to
modernize things like expertise, that appear to be properties of individuals?
Even small steps towards postmodernism — if taken to its limit as a radical
position — can feel like a slippery slope into a chaos where there is no truth,
no meaning, no representation. 

That isn’t necessarily the case, though: the virtue of postmodernism is that it
exposes the cracks in the modernist facade. It doesn’t need to provide
explanations about how to overcome them to be useful. It opens the curtain
enough to reveal glimpses about what’s going on behind — and this is where its
reflexivity becomes truly insightful. 

It is no accident that postmodernism is particularly influential in the arts —
perhaps where commentary on society is so free. A lovely example is the movie,
*Paint Drying* — which is literally of paint drying on a wall for over ten
hours. Except it isn’t about that at all: it was created as a protest of film
rating systems, and the way small independent creators were billed for it. So
the movie is ironic, and more about censorship than about paint. 

# Modernization in practice: Guinness

One of the best examples of the process of modernization is the innovation in
the brewing company, Guinness, and especially the involvement of the man who
eventually became one of their Head Brewers, one William Sealy Gosset. 

Brewing was an industry that modernized early. In the Middle Ages most beer was
brewed by monasteries. Over time, this role was increasingly undertaken
initially by guilds with government monopolies, such as London’s Worshipful
Company of Brewers, and into the 19^th^ century, increasingly by corporations
like Guinness and Shepherd Neame in the UK, and Yuengling and Pabst in the US.
These new companies drew increasingly on science, using innovations like hopping
(which preserved the beer, keeping it safer longer) and hygrometers (to control
the amount of sugar, keeping the product reliable). For example, the main trade
association in the UK, the Institute of Brewing and Distilling, was originally
founded in 1886 as the Laboratory Club, because it integrated brewing and
science. 

Gosset was a remarkably strong (although self-trained) statistician -- a man who
corresponded in depth with the leading lights of the statistical
movement[^StatisticsEugenics]. Unlike them, Gosset remained solidly focused on
his day job: improving practice at Guinness. 

[^StatisticsEugenics]: Over the years, Gosset corresponded and worked with both
    Karl Pearson and Ronald Fisher, among the two most important figures in 20th
    Century statistics — and, perhaps, the clearest examples of its distasteful
    history (both also were leaders in the eugenics movement). Pearson and
    Fisher hated each other, but both respected Gosset. There is no evidence
    that Gosset endorsed eugenics.

When Gosset started out in the brewing industry, brewing was still rooted in
traditional expertise. Human judgement shaped every step of the process from
what varieties of grain to grow, when to harvest, through to fermentation
temperatures and conditions. This was all to change as the process of
modernization got to work. 

As part of the transformation that Gosset pioneered during his career at
Guinness, he developed a wide range of techniques and methods for using
mathematics and experimental methods to directly improve commercial success.
Many of those methods are still used today in modern statistics, where Gosset is
better known by his pseudonym, “Student”[^fn2].

[^Student]: Gosset published several important papers under the name, “Student”. His
    employers at Guinness were happy for him to publish, under condition that it
    was not linked to Guinness.

Let’s pick an example from one part of the process. Brewing uses malted barley
as its main source of the sugars which drive fermentation. If there are a lot of
sugars in the malt, the resulting product has more alcohol in it. But Guinness
wanted to make their product consistently, no matter what. There were sound
commercial reasons to get this just right: if the alcohol content was high, the
beer would last longer, but it would attract a higher government tax; and if too
low, the beer would spoil more quickly, and have to be thrown out too soon. So,
where traditionally this relied on the expertise to estimate the sugars, Gosset
and his bosses wanted to measure the sugar content reliably, to hit the sweet
spot in the middle, and hit it reliably every single time, because that would
reduce their costs and therefore boost their profits. 

Unfortunately, a single measurement of the amount of sugar in a sample tends not
to be very reliable. Repeating the measurements provides much more data, and
improves the reliability. Gusset’s innovation was to mathematically calculate
exactly how to combine the results of experiments in way that optimizes
confidence in the result. In effect, Gosset was able to work out exactly how
many assessments were needed to be certain that the amount of sugar was perfect
for fermention, producing the consistent beer strength that Guinness was aiming
for. The risks of paying too much tax or losing beer to spoilage could then be
eliminated.

This is classic modernization: a method that was previously entirely dependent
on human skill and traditional judgment is replaced by a more efficient and more
consistent method that’s based on scientific methods. And gradually, Gosset’s
methods transformed Guinness, ending with Gosset himself as Head Brewer for
their new London-based brewery. 

## Individualization

At the centre of reflexive modernity is a process of individualization —
essentially that individual people are now required to handle social change and
uncertainty more directly as individuals, and that they have to put time and
effort into this. Where, in previous generations, unemployment (to pick one
example) was a social problem, it is now an individual one. The same goes for
climate change: previous generations could pressure governments to act, now the
shoe is on the other foot, and governments are putting the problems back on us
as an individuals. Worried about climate change? Let’s put a tax on fossil
fuels. 

It looks like “freedom” but this freedom is a sheep in wolf’s clothing, and that
wolf is individualization. Where once we had social systems to support us, now
each one of us is navigating the world alone in our own personal maze of twisty
little passages, all alike. That is individualization.7

One example is the ubiquitous terms and conditions of software. To use, say, an
iPhone, every single one of us needs to agree to several thousand pages of legal
license agreement, with some significant conditions. Most of these are
completely irrelevant (although not always) but they do reflect the way we, as
individuals, are now confronted with these new and complex realities. 

And in fact, the consequences can be much more significant.  Adobe, for example,
recently underlined that individual users could be sued for using old versions
of Photoshop that they bought and paid for. That is because Adobe had the right
to “discontinue” the product, and when it did, the right to use the software
ended. Adobe has yet to enforce this, but the fact that they are preparing to do
so demonstrates the way that individual users are now confronted with handling
the consequences of Adobe’s business decisions -- which they have no control
over or insight into.

Another example is positive psychology. 

In part this is individualization, yes, but also — technology enables
individualization at scale, in a way previous technologies do not. Artificial
intelligence, especially so. 


## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
