---
chapter: 2
title: Risk technologies
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

Modernization has happened through a wide range of technologies. Early on, it
was harnessing power, and then through industrial automation. Consistently,
though, it took old, slow, labour-intensive, resource-demanding, and unreliable
processes, and reworked them to be faster, easier, cheaper, and more consistent.
Transportation systems which relied on horses and carts moved to canals, then to
rail, then road, shipping and air. Factories that relied on human expertise
began to automate, gradually replacing steps in the creation and packaging of
their products. Global trade networks gradually evolved, replacing local 
industry with a network of complex international provision. 

This process continued until, eventually, the manufacturing and heavy industry
became sufficiently globalized that it effectively collapsed in many areas --
trade made it cheaper and easier to ship products halfway around the world than
to make at home. Economies of scale had reached their absolute limit: maybe even
one single factory capable of producing enough product for the entire world. 

But modernization was not done. New ways of improving efficiency were found.
After all, there's more to the global trade in, say, Corn Flakes, than just making
boxes of the stuff. They have to be shipped, paid for, delivered where they are 
needed before the goods expire, labelled in the right language, and so on. And on 
top of all that, people need to be paid. 

This was where the computer took hold. We tend to think of the computer as
a creation of wartime, and it was, in both the US and the UK[^Wartime]. But 
very soon after the war, commercial uses became far more valuable. In 1951, 
both the US UNIVAC and the UK LEO computers came out, both targeted at business 
applications like payroll and inventory management. 

[^Wartime]: The US and the US used their proto-computing for very different
    purposes, even in the context of wartime. Much of the US need was driven by
    physics simulations for the Manhattan Project, where in the UK, it was
    driven by the need to decrypt enemy communications signals.

But there is a difference, pointed out by Beck (1992, p11). The early stages of
modernization were about modernizing *tradition*. That's what we are doing when
we replace a horse and cart by a barge or a train. But, later, we come to a
point where we are no longer modernizing tradition, we are modernizing
industrial society, which is itself the outcome of modernization. This is a 
new *reflexive* modernization, and very different technologies -- technologies
like the electronic computer -- are at play.

Beck's point is that the early parts of modernization, classical modernization
if you like, are largely about goods. Sure, risks might emerge during the 
process -- Corn Flakes might be bad for you, for example, but the risks 
at this stage tend to be unforeseen side effects. They wouldn't be, and 
often couldn't be, anticipated.

However, when we start modernizing industrial society, when we enter
reflexive modernization, it's all about risks, and in many ways risks
become significantly more important even than goods. Managing inventory
by computer doesn't help you make any more product, but it does help
you track the date on each batch of Corn Flakes, so that none get left
in the back of the warehouse to go bad. It reduces risks. 

So, in the second half of the 20th Century, a new class of technologies
started to emerge, technologies that were less about goods and more 
about risks. 

## Risk technologies

Above and beyond the humble digital computer, some of the risk
technologies that we are interested in, include:

* Cryptography
* Information retrieval
* Digital rights management
* Smart cards
* 3-D printing
* Internet of things
* Smart phones
* Social media
* Genome sequencing
* Artificial intelligence

Although these are very different technologies, they form an interesting cluster
-- all of them move risks around in economically important ways. They are also
*technologies of individualization*. What do we mean by this?

Back in the middle of the 20th Century, industrial innovation was based on
"scaling up". Ford could make cars more cheaply because they were all the same. 
Parts became standardized. These economies of scale made a big difference to
costs, but they came with one consequence: the range of products shrank. 
This process is still going on in manufacturing, as corporations consolidate
and merge.

But in services, economies of scale can be limiting. If, for example, you're
building web sites for people, or handling their bank accounts, or handling
their tax filing, or teaching, there are hard limits. People are unique, all
different and in different situations, so a new kind of technology is needed, a
technology that embraces and improves efficiencies even with these individual
differences. These technologies mean that two different people using the 
same services can get appropriately distinct provisions.

And this makes sense in Beck's framing. When modernizing tradition, the
weaknesses are in consistency. Every product is different, because they
are the product of human craft. But when we have moved into industrial
society, where every product is the same, then *that* becomes the weakness,
the lack of individuality.

Risk technologies enable this level of individualization. Cryptography allows
one internet service to authenticate and manage people uniquely -- it's
fundamental. It even enables us to know for certain that our credit card
information is being sent to people we trust, and not scammers. Digital 
rights management technology builds on this, so that someone paying access
to a movie can see it, but those who didn't pay, can't. Smart phones and 
the internet of things bring technology to a personal level: my smart
watch can track my unique fitness -- even though the device itself gains
from benefits of scale, the data and services are individualized.

3-D printing extends this into manufacturing. Where historically making a 
one-off product was prohibitively expensive, because it involved lots of
manual effort, 3-D printing makes it possible to make one-offs relatively 
cheaply -- dental aligners are an excellent example. 

When technologies enable individualization, a new and inverted kind of
'trickle-down economics' happens by default. The myth of trickle-down economics
is, of course, that wealth really doesn't tend to flow down from the rich -- at
least, not very far; instead, it mostly flows up to the wealthy. But risks are
different:, risks generally *do* tend to flow down from the most powerful to the
least powerful, and especially from corporations to individuals. As the old
military saying does, "shit rolls downhill".

What's really interesting is that in a risk society, risks become more
economically significant than conventional goods. We can see the signs of 
this in the 2008 financial derivatives collapse where, put simply, risky
investments were concealed from buyers, until a critical point was reached 
where those risks destroyed much of the wider financial system. 

But it goes beyond that. There is a saying, especially in the tech sector: "if
you’re not paying for it, you’re not the customer; you’re the
product"[^SayingCredit]. But is this true? In a purely monetary sense, yes, but
risk society adds a new dimension to it. If we think about the relationship as
one that includes risks as well as money, we can interpret it differently.

[^SayingCredit]: This formulation of the phrase is by Andrew Lewis, and
    popularized by technology publisher Tim O’Reilly in 2010. However, the
    framing likely originated in a 1973 artwork by Richard Serra and Carlota Fay
    Schoolman, “Television Delivers People”, which included messages like "you
    are the end product".

What, after all, is advertising? It is, basically, a way to reduce the risks of
selling a product or a service -- a product is more likely to make money if it
is advertised. If you think about it, advertising is more about reducing the
risk of losing money than it is about making money. We are not only the product,
the risks of buying what people want to sell are being passed onto us, as
members of the audience. 

In this sense, it is no coincidence that the big technology companies, such as
Google and Meta, came to dominate the world of advertising.


When we think like this, we need to remember, as Beck says, that risks are not
universally bad things. A new product may be great, it may improve our lives
significantly. In a sense, risks are the fuel as well as the product of
progress and innovation.

The second point is that although we tend to think about "big" risks, the 
important aspect of risk technologies like these is that they enable risks to
be broken up into tiny pieces and distributed. People think about big risks 
and small risks in very different ways, so this use of technology is
truly transformative. 

Let's take an example. Back in the olden days, some of the biggest financial
risks were borne by the institutions. They could be robbed by Butch and 
Sundance, or they could crash. Either would obviously be bad for customers,
but shareholders and owners would be hit particularly hard. Governments and
regulators would set rules which would aim to protect customers, 

Now look at modern banking. Large scale bank robberies are now extremely
rare -- technology has provided solutions to improve security. But individualized
fraud is widespread. 

In effect, the big risks have been broken up into small pieces, and through
technologies like smart cards, and through laws and policies too, the fragments
have been offloaded onto customers and clients. This fragmentation and
individualization of risk is a distinctive part of risk society, and 

## Cryptography

Although cryptography is, in one form or another, millennia old, a thoroughly 
modern set of asymmetric technologies for it emerged in the middle of the
20th Century. 

## Information retrieval

Information retrieval has a long and respectable history. The concepts have
their origins in Vannevar Bush’s seminal 1945 paper *As We May Think*, a post-War
grand challenge to re-invigorate the US research community, and which itself
predates the electronic computer. 

In a sense, this was a perfect field for the modernizing influence of computers.
Old fashioned libraries of the time used physical indexes extensively, such as
the Dewey decimal system and index cards for cross-referencing. For example,
finding books by a named author involved finding the index card for that author
in an alphabetically-ordered cabinet, then using that card to trace the books.
Maintaining these indexes is a lot of manual work — work which computers could
automate very effectively. And finding information wasn’t easy for users either:
it typically involved opening lots of drawers of index cards as well as multiple
visits to the main document stores. And this isn’t just libraries, either:
virtually any large document worked the same way, as a large collection of
files, some for documents and some for indexes.

The field of information retrieval modernized these systems, using technology to
assist and automate indexing but also going well beyond it, both for the people
managing the documents and for those trying to find the information they need. A
typical information retrieval system would enable document collection managers
to build and maintain a search system, so that someone who needed information
would be able to enter a query, and get back documents relevant to their needs.

Relevance is worth unpacking a little. Let’s imagine someone — a palaeontology
student, for example — wants to find a text on the anatomy of trilobites. They
may use a search phrase, such as “anatomy of trilobites”. An information
retrieval system will give them, in response, a set of possible results. Some of
them might be useful, and some not; for example, a document “what are
trilobites?”  might include all the words, but be too general. Similarly, a
document “anatomy of horseshoe crabs” might not contain all the words, but be
useful anyway.  Relevance is, put simply, how well the results match the user’s
needs. The fancy technology in information retrieval is all about inferring that
as well as it can, using the information available. That can include the
document text, but also other information, like how frequently a document is
used.

## Smart cards

The humble smart card is a beautiful innovation -- embedding within a small and
portable piece of plastic a tiny chip that allows secret information to be
stored and verified in tamper-proof ways. As a replacement for openly readable
magnetic strips, they make it more or less impossible for a nefarious individual
to copy the card. As this was one of the biggest risks for fraud, that was a
huge innovation. 

But smart cards had wider applications than that. Because they provided a
relatively cheap but unique and hard to copy thing, they also enabled cable TV
companies to lock services[^Murdoch]. If a customer, Sam, paid for premium channels, their
smart card could ensure that only they could receive those channels, while 
another customer, Pat, *while receiving exactly the same information through the 
cable*, could not. Again, it's an application of asymmetric cryptography that 
enables a service to be made truly individual. 

[^Murdoch]: As I say, "hard to copy", smart cards could be hacked, especially in
    the early days. Indeed, one digital TV company in the UK was impacted by
    loss of revenue, about 8% of viewers were using hacked and fraudulent smart
    cards to access the service. The company eventually failed, and while there
    were questionable links between those who hacked the cards and the company's 
    main competitor, Murdoch's Sky TV, it's unlikely that the hacked cards were
    significant factors in its downfall.



## 3-D printing



## The internet of things



## Genome sequencing



## Digital rights management

At first blush, this is a simple application of cryptography, but its impact on
how risks are distributed is significant.

Stepping back, before the digital revolution, there was no technology that
prevented the copying of media. If you bought a vinyl album, it was a
straightforward matter to copy it onto a cassette, or digitize it into MP3
files. This was, for music publishers especially, a significant risk. Piracy was
a threat to their business. 

As the music industry integrated more vertically, companies like Sony controlled
hardware as well as music publishing, and were in a position where their
technical reach and their property rights interests started to align. The Sony
MiniDisc was a wonderful innovation, but since Sony intentionally disabled
digital output from their recorders, it struggled to gain market share over
contemporary technologies like the cassette tape, even with its far superior
quality. 

## Artificial intelligence

And finally, the daddy of all the risk technologies is modern artificial
intelligence. There are several reasons for this. First, artificial intelligence
enables the link between a company or individual and the consequences of the
technology to be severed. This is inherent in our reactions to complex machine
behaviour — they are attributed to the system, but not to the people who
constructed it. An AI system is an agent, acting on behalf of others — and to
some extent shielding them from the risks. This is a unique characteristic of
artificial intelligence’s portrayal as a psychological artifact rather than an
engineering one. So, to pick one example, if we get the wrong answer from
ChatGPT, we interpret that as an issue with ChatGPT, not an issue with OpenAI. 

The second element of risk in artificial intelligence is its almost unique
ability to scale up actions which were previously only possible through real
human expertise. This is true modernization. However, unlike previous
generations of automation, which were essentially the same for everyone,
artificial intelligence allows individualization at scale. ChatGPT isn’t like a
car or a washing machine, where everyone gets the same experience. Artificial
intelligence can build legal contracts, artworks, novels, political ads,
industrial designs, programs, and government policies, each of them as unique as
a snowflake. And every single thing it generates comes with its own entirely
unique new package of risks. We are awash in new, unique, generated risks, and
at a speed which reduces our ability to weigh these risks effectively. 

It would be easy to focus too much on artificial intelligence as ‘the’
technology of risk, but that would be misleading. There are many different ways
that technology today shapes the social flow of risk, and much of it has nothing
to do with artificial intelligence. Cryptocurrencies introduce some fascinating
risks — through their determination that transactions cannot be reversed, even
if they are fundamentally fraudulent. Cellular phones enable our risks to follow
us around our daily lives, biotechnology means that risks can cross into the
realm of the biological, social media injects risks into our daily and intimate
social interactions. None of these are necessarily dependent on artificial
intelligence at all. However, what is special about artificial intelligence is
that it enables bespoke risks to be manufactured at scale, but still on a
personalized basis. This is new and unique. It is the ability of this specific
technology to tailor its behaviour to each person’s individual circumstances —
and to do so at global scale — that makes it such an important part of this new
phase of modernization.

## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
