---
chapter: 7
title: Engines of creation and destruction
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

## Creative destruction

One of the central points I want to make is that we can view the way our society
works as a *process*. Things are constantly evolving. As David, the synthetic
human in the movie *Prometheus* put it: “Sometimes to create, one must first
destroy”. Creation and destruction form two parts of that evolving process.

In economics, the person most closely associated with this (other than perhaps
Marx) is Joseph Schumpeter, who used the term “creative destruction” as the
force necessary for innovation. Put simply, creation of a new market requires
the destruction of an old one. For streaming services to rise, video rental
stores needed to fall. For every Netflix, there has to be a Blockbuster.
Once-household names that dominated markets like Xerox, Kodak, Polaroid, and
even IBM, all of them can be victims to innovation. Ultimately, nobody is safe.
Even an Apple can fall. 

For Marx, this was why capitalism was flawed. But even Schumpeter — who was
generally positive about capitalism and innovation — questioned the
sustainability of this process — would there be a point where the ‘destruction’
part started to erode the rules of capitalism itself? What happens when the
‘destruction’ part involves removing critical components of democracy, or market
fairness, to enable better profits? Could the ‘destruction’ part result in
innovations like artificially-generated diseases with an intentional goal of
driving demand for commercial cures. Put simply, the invisible hand may guide
the markets, but the invisible hand itself can be guided by technology. These
are the kinds of questions that started to anticipate reflexive modernization. 

Silicon Valley loves creative description. If you are trying to build a
market against incumbents, it is a wonderful framework. Good old-fashioned
Yellow Pages was replaced by the age of the internet first by the likes of Alta
Vista, then Alta Vista was replaced by Google. The cycle continues. In the same
way, Uber sets out to replace taxi companies, Amazon sets out to replace
old-fashioned department stores. Netflix and YouTube set out to replace
traditional television networks, in slightly different ways. Spotify sets out to
replace record stores and music radio. No company can stand still against
Schumpeter’s gale. Economic competition is all very Red Queen, from *Alice
Through the Looking-Glass*: ”here we must run as fast as we can, just to stay in
place. And if you wish to go anywhere you must run twice as fast as that”. You
don’t have to go far from there to see Facebook’s original motto of “moving fast
and breaking things”.

The theory of creative destruction is that it is ultimately intertwined with
modernization. It depends on four things: innovation, competition,
entrepreneurship, and capital. The process starts with innovation, a new idea or
process. This provides a competitive advantage, so that those who use the
innovation perform better than those who don’t. Entrepreneurs are the active
agents of change — they are the ones who shepherd the innovations into
commercial reality. And finally, money matters too: without an appropriate
financial resource, even the most powerful innovations will not be able to
succeed competitively. But when all the components fit together in just the
right way, they provide a powerful engine that can progressively modernize
entire industries, sometimes piece by piece, and sometimes radically and
dramatically. 

Along the way, creative destruction introduces the kinds of side effect that
power the risks Beck observed, because the economics and the incentives changed.
Let’s look at Spotify as an example. Spotify was not the first music streaming
company, but it was about the first to attempt to put it on a legal foundation.
Instead of people ‘buying’ music permanently, their subscription allowed people
to listen to almost anything, by choice. However, there were, obviously
consequences. First, a lot of people didn’t want to buy music any more — after
all, why pay $1 for a track when you can listen to hundreds for a flat monthly
fee. The first consequence, therefore, was reduced sales for those who continued
to sell music, such as record stores, Amazon, Apple, and so on. This in turn
reduced the amount that artists received: previously, they had received
royalties as part of their copyrights, but under streaming, they were paid a
very much smaller amount per listen, typically around $0.005 — and most of this
is retained by the label or publisher. This completely transformed the economics
for a performing musician, to a point where even a globally successful artist
might well have an income similar to that of a Uber driver. And Spotify itself
has never yet turned a profit, but its annual revenue is well into the billions.
In effect, while the innovation of music streaming services was a great deal for
consumers, but pushed performing artists into entirely different means of
earning a living: and most notably, regenerated live performances. 

The chart below shows this in detail. Note that at the same time streaming
revenues rise dramatically, download revenues fall. The big technology companies
aren’t on the sharp end of these transformations, but performing artists --
particularly and especially the less wealthy ones -- definitely are. 

<figure class="figure w-100">
  <img class="img-fluid mx-auto d-block" src="/img/book/streaming-chart.png" 
       alt="Global music revenues in different streams">
    <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">
    Global music revenues in different streams
    </figcaption>
</figure>

As this shows, the impacts of streaming were both direct and indirect. The
direct consequence is a strong global growth into becoming the single largest
source of revenue in the industry. The indirect consequences include: (a) a drop
in download revenues, (b) a continuation of the drop in physical revenues, and
(c) gradual growth in live performances (except, of course, during the COVID
pandemic). 

## The Matthew effect

We tend to think that the world is fair, and that merit is rewarded. If we work
hard, we will reap the benefits of it. Unfortunately, that turns out not to be
the case. Inequality — and the processes that generate more inequality — are
built into the fabric of our social institutions.

One of the best examples of this is the “Matthew Effect”, a concept named after
the parable of the talents in the Gospel of Matthew, *“For to every
one who has will more be given, and he will have abundance; but from him who has
not, even what he has will be taken away”* ( Matthew 25:29, RSV). Originally this
referred to the tendency for ‘successful’ scientists to get credit for work,
even when less well known figures had actually done it. In a delightfully ironic
twist, the concept was first described by Harriet Zuckerman and only afterwards
amplified by Robert K. Merton, but acknowledgement is almost invariably given
solely to Merton. This is the Matthew effect in action.

And it doesn’t just apply to science. It’s endemic to social media, for example.
On X, the number of users with a thousand followers can be estimated at around
at around 5 million — say 2% of the daily users. The number of users with a
million followers is extremely small — less than 10,000 world wide, around
0.004% of the daily users. 

But these users have significant advantages, algorithmically. The recommendation
systems will suggest them to new users, for example. Their posts will also be
promoted, even to people who do not follow them. The algorithms, quite
literally, give followers to those who already have them in abundance.
Recommendation systems like these, which are modelled on the way we tend to
believe social recommendation works, promote inequality. 

You can even test this experimentally. Salganik, Dodds, and Watts designed an
elegant experiment, where two groups of people were asked to rate songs in a
music marketplace. One of the groups worked independently, with no way to find
out how other people felt about the same songs. The other group could also see a
score, based on how many times each song had been downloaded by others. What the
researchers found was that the success of a particular song was more
unpredictable when people could see the download score —- in other words, not a
property of the song itself, but of the dynamics of the marketplace. What’s
more, if the download count results are presented in order, rather than
randomly, then success was even more disconnected from the song. People were
using the download count as a form of recommendation, and basing their rating on
that more than on their own judgements. 

So in these situations, where people are sharing opinions in public, meritocracy
falls down and is replaced by a tendency for the ‘merit’ to accrue into a
relatively small number of high profile examples. And it doesn’t matter whether
that’s in music marketplaces, peer reviewed science, publishing, journalism,
finance — in all cases, for every one who has, more will be given, and he will
have abundance (and it all too often is “he”).

But let’s get back to music. The streaming marketplaces literally pay artists
and their publishers by the number of listens.

Recommender systems are one of the older areas where artificial intelligence has
had an impact — partly because the algorithms can be very simple. If you look at
Amazon today, for example, all the same dynamics are there. If you buy a watch
today, it’ll recommend other watches to you tomorrow. If a book has a high
percentage of positive reviews, it’ll show up higher on the recommendations. 

In this world, word-of-mouth recommendation is transformed. These products are
“recommended for you”. We don’t ask, “who by?” We don’t ask, “why?”
Recommendation has changed from a shop assistant’s word, or a friend’s word, to
a diffuse step away from the existence of a *recommendation*. A true
recommendation has a fitness for purpose, and that is lost in a sea of ‘likes’.
The algorithm masks that reality. 

And the rules of the game have changed. It is all too easy for a seller to pay
for positive reviews, to promote themselves. 

The entire essence of search engine optimization is playing the Matthew effect
for gain. And there’s a ‘Prisoner’s Dilemma’ aspect to this — if we refuse to
play the game, if we refuse to use search engine optimization, we lose out to
(unscrupulous) others who to play the game, as well as the many (scrupulous)
others who simply want to continue to play. 

## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
