---
chapter: 8
title: Modern money, modern crime
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

If there is a unique feature to the new millennium, it is the way that
encryption has enabled one of the most strikingly powerful examples of creative
destruction that we have ever seen. In fact, encryption is old — the true
innovation is what’s known as “asymmetric encryption”, which allow us, if you
like, to keep our private keys private, and therefore overcome (for the most
part) the trust problem. In effect, most of the technologies that drive the way
technologies are reshaping the world we live in depend on encryption in one way
or another.

What encryption provides is a way for us to select who can receive our
communications in the digital world. In the physical world, we rely on secrecy.
If I speak in a small room with walls, I generally assume that nobody outside
the room can really know what’s going on. The digital world does not have any
walls, for example, every email I send is sent as clear text. Encryption
provides what Erving Goffman calls an “involvement shield”, rather like a
bedroom, a bathroom, or a mask, it provides a way to selectively hide what we do
from other people.

And it is not a coincidence that so many of the applications are financial.
Finance has depended for centuries on secrets of one kind or another, whether it
is your Roman signet ring or where you hide your cash. Encryption provides a
ready means for improving these, and reducing the risks to everyone involved in
a transaction. The idea of using cryptographic techniques to build a currency
seemed a natural one.

## Tokens

In one sense, alternative forms of currency are nothing new. At the beginning of
the industrial revolution, there was a significant shortage of small
denomination coins — the sizes that were needed to pay workers. This was
particularly true in the industrializing North — the government did not
distribute pennies -- the unit of currency needed to pay workers' wages --
outside London, and even stopped making them entirely in 1775[^Minting].

[^Minting]: 
    This was, of course, before the industrial revolution. At the time, coins
    were literally made by hand, so a dramatic growth in demand could create a
    burden on state currency production. Eventually, mechanization caught up
    with minting coins, and the new steam power technology transformed the
    process, and a new generation of copper coins started to appear in 1789,
    with tokens becoming illegal (as currency) in the 1820s.

As a result, employers began to make their own “token” coins, which could then
be accepted and traded in the local community. Possibly the best-known example
is that of the Parys Mountain mining company, based on Ynys Môn (in English:
Anglesey), at the time the largest copper mine in Europe. They minted about 200
tons of pennies (“Druids” — due to the picture of a druid on one side) over
about thirty years.

Tokens have some significant advantages -- especially when the government's
handling of currency is failing for one reason or another. For example, when
coins were short during the United States civil war, and during the United
Kingdom's industrial revolution, tokens took up the slack. They were also 
widely used to 'lock' payments to a particular store or area. And finally,
they were an early form of advertising. 

{: .mark}
Switch to an image of several of the tokens from my collection. I have the 
druid, but I have a few others that are just as intriguing. Also, we should 
work to be safe from copyrighting. This image is a placeholder.

<figure class="figure w-100">
  <img class="img-fluid mx-auto d-block" src="/img/book/druid.jpg" 
       alt="Parys Mountain one penny token">
    <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">
    Parys Mountain one penny token
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Of course, the idea of an alternative currency, one existing outside the reach
of government regulation — and even to compensate for the disadvantages of
government — was not over!

## Networked money

With the advent of modernization, international borders started to call, and
currency was no exception. Except, that is, for governments. Each country had
its own currency, and sending money between countries involved either suitcases
or international banks, both with significant costs or risks. There was an
opening for a way to send money between countries electronically. 

## Bitcoin

Tokens arrived in the fully digital area with Bitcoin, which assembled a 
collection of technological innovations. 

First, it used a blockchain to record transactions in the open. The key
innovation here is to use cryptography to sign data, so it cannot be modified.
This means if anybody tries to change any of the data anywhere, all data after
that point will mark the point of change as invalid, because its cryptographic
signature will no longer match.[^Collisions]

[^Collisions]: Well, technically data could be tampered with could be if the
    cryptographic algorithm could be broken, but assuming the algorithms used
    are all secure, that's extremely unlikely. 

The second innovation was to use a "proof of work" system. Generally these work
by having some piece of text, which includes a counter, and using a good
cryptographic algorithm like SHA256[^Hashing] to make a digest of it. If the last 10
characters of the digest are all zero, the this version of the text is good. If
not, then we increment the counter and try again, and repeat until we get all
the zeros. This means we have to a reasonably significant amount of computation
to get a valid signature, hence "proof of work". Fortunately, only the one
generating the signature needs to do this -- everyone else can verify it with
exactly one hashing round. 

[^Hashing]: The point in all hashing algorithms like SHA256 is that any single
    character change in the text input makes the output entirely different.
    There has to be no predictable pattern, because if there is, then it becomes
    possible to guess how to construct inputs to achieve a specific hash
    signature. If that can be achieved, then the algorithm has failed. In fact,
    if it is ever possible for someone with a supercomputer to build an input
    for a specific output, the algorithm is replaced. This has happened quite
    a few times, e.g., for MD5 and SHA-1. 

There are some significant differences, though. In a regular transaction, say if
I buy a bag of potatoes at a store, if I am not happy, I can do and ask for my
money back. If I am really not happy, and I pay through a bank or Visa, the back
or Visa can forcibly reverse the transaction. The same is not true of Bitcoin
and most similar platforms, by design. Money isn't sent to named people, but to
anonymous addresses, and -- thanks to the blockchain -- once a transaction has
been recorded it cannot be modified. This is particularly useful for some groups,
such as criminals[^Reversibility].

[^Reversibility]: In many ways, this lack of reversibility makes Bitcoin more
    like good old-fashioned cash, than other forms of electronic currency like
    credit cards. Once someone has your bitcoins, they're gone.

## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
