---
chapter: 9
title: Intellectual property
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

## Intellectual property and modernization

One of the biggest factors enabling modernization was the development and
evolution of a new kind of property -- intellectual property. If I grow a box of
potatoes and trade it, the person who buys is now the new owner of the potatoes,
but I have something else in return. This trade enables people to use their
expertise in a way that everybody gains. Intellectual property creates some new
rules that allow us to trade in things that aren't physical objects, like ideas,
words, songs, and inventions.

If I write a book and sell it, while — just like the potatoes — I no longer own
the physical book itself. But, the book is not only a physical object, it also
contains my thoughts, my ideas. It would be a problem if the person I sold my book to
could just print a thousand copies and sell them -- they would be the one benefiting
from all my work. So, intellectual property rights create a fair system that
enables a trade in ideas and inventions. 

For example, copyright means that without my permission, nobody else can print
the book and sell it. These are the “economic rights”. But what I can do, I can
‘sell’[^Sell] my economic rights to a book to the publisher, and then they own
the rights, and can more or less do what they like. Economic rights are usually
time-limited, so eventually they expire and the works become free.  

[^Sell]: Whether you can really sell a piece of intellectual property depends on the
    jurisdiction and the type of property. In some places, all you can do is
    sell a license to the use the property, along with a contractual obligation
    not to use it yourself. In others, you really can sell your stake in the
    property.

A second feature of copyright is that I keep the right to be identified as the
author, this is one of a few “moral rights” — at least, that’s the way it works
in most of the world. So, even if they do own the right to sell, the publisher
can’t simply put someone else’s name on the book. I also keep the right to
protect the integrity of the work. In other words, if the publisher’s
exploitation of the economic rights (which they may have paid for) affects my
reputation, as an author, I can use my moral rights to step in. In some places,
like the US, moral rights can be waived (effectively, legally promising never to
use them), but in others, such as much of Europe, they cannot be waived. 

This fair system makes trade in ideas and inventions possible. It is not a
stretch to say that without intellectual property rights, capitalism itself, as
we know it today, could not exist.

And this makes sense: if people are to survive in any other way than by growing
all their own potatoes, the risks associated with other forms of production have
to be contained. And that is what intellectual property does. 

But obviously kings don't have the time to print books -- or the expertise, for
that matter. The solution was for the monarchs to grant permission to use
printing presses to an elite group which would be under their control, in the
form of a power which could be recalled if required. These permissions from
sovereigns were 'letters patent', patent meaning "open", as these letters were
intended to be used to verify the authority to print. These early letters patent
evolved into the systems for granting rights to exploit inventions that we still
use today.

In some cases, these assets are entirely manufactured. Domain names are a good 
example. Once the domain name system was invented, it enabled an almost infinite
variety of domain names to be created and owned. 

## Intellectual property and feudalism

But there is a price to be paid for enabling ownership in intellectual property,
over and above the trade it supports. Is the concept of intellectual property
implicitly forcing us to apply a feudal style of ownership to ideas? And if so,
what does this mean for society and the greater good?

These questions are troubling, not least because the corporate artificial
intelligence community’s wholesale appropriation of art, literature, and code
under the guise of “fair use” -- despite their blatant intention to complete with
authors of art, literature, and code -- strains credibility to the point that
ownership of intellectual property itself may be starting to break down. Or
perhaps that is the plan – like the velociraptors in Jurassic Park, OpenAI and
similar companies are testing the fences of property rights systematically for
weaknesses they can exploit.

In this case, companies like Meta, Google, OpenAI, and Adobe are challenging
whether they can reach into other people’s property for their own commercial
goals. Or maybe they are putting up new fences, in a new kind of adverse
possession, seizing intellectual property and daring society to contest it, in
the hope that what they’ve created is too big to fail.

As we have seen, while historically automation focused on improving the
production of physical goods, it has gone beyond that. The latest generation of
artificial intelligence models, in particular, are capable of automatically
generating images and computer code, for example. These have at least a 
passing resemblance to the fruits of human creative work. 

But this is where things get sticky. A common feature of of copyright, patents,
and similar intellectual property, is that they must result from real (human)
labour. Anything that is trivial or automated simply cannot be owned. If you
design a logo, or compose a piece of music, using dice or a random number
generator – or, indeed, any other algorithm – it isn’t yours; it isn’t
*anybody’s*.

Interestingly, Open AI tries to push the envelope here:

> “**Ownership of content.** As between you and OpenAI, and to the extent permitted
> by applicable law, you (a) retain your ownership rights in Input and (b) own
> the Output. We hereby assign to you all our right, title, and interest, if
> any, in and to Output.” *(OpenAI Terms of Use)*

Over and beyond the technicalities of whether a “creative” (copyrightable,
patentable) artifact generated by algorithm can be owned, automation also has a
second effect: it shifts the burden of effort (labour, if you like) from the
creator to the consumer. As Beck (1992, p220) puts it:

{:.mark} 
There are also important points to make about Fluxus, such as Cale's point that
'letting go' of artistic control (through automation, technology, randomization)
can actually increase the pressure on artistic work, and we need to make that
base, but this might not be the right place to do that.


## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
