---
chapter: 9
title: The modern workplace
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

The effect of Gosset's modernization in Guinness, described in Chapter 3, was
one small part of a global phenomenon. Across the world, all kinds of industries
were using scientific methods to improve their practices, whether they were
aiming to optimize grain yields or improve the productivity of human employees.
The largest and best known aspect of this is “scientific management”. 

## Scientific management

In the workplace, scientific management was one of the most influential
modernist ideas. The defining features of scientific management are hard to pin
down, but generally it applies a broadly positivist[^Positivism] approach to improving
economic efficiency. Taylor identified five main principles:

[^Positivism]: 
    Broadly, positivism means that the only valid guides about whether something
    is true or not come from either clear empirical evidence or logic and
    reason. Everything else, opinion, introspection, faith -- they are, at best,
    misleading. Therefore, it aims to eliminate personal bias from our thinking
    and decision-making, but also tradition and craft.

1.  **Science, not rule of thumb.** First and foremost, scientific management was
    about replacing human judgements by an (objective) science. The common theme is
    a skepticism of intuitive judgements, and a strong preference for data-supported
    alternatives. Scientific management pre-figured behavioural science, but only
    because it didn’t exist yet — as soon as it started to develop methods for
    measuring and influencing behaviour, it was a natural complement. Psychometrics,
    for example, were quickly integrated into scientific management. At least to
    begin with, psychometrics were somewhat unreliable, but for the purposes of
    scientific management that didn’t matter — it was the appearance of science that
    mattered more than the reality.

2.  **Harmony, not discord.** Scientific management tilts the balance of power,
    increasing the amount of management influence over the way work is done.
    Instead of depending on an individual workers’ skill, management could use
    workers with a little less skill and a little more precise control.
    However, even for Taylor (and despite his disdain for unions) efficient
    work depended on harmony between management and workers. This often
    involved transforming the way workers were paid, including bonuses and
    performance-related pay. However, scientific management depended on, and
    even sharpened, the distinctions between workers and managers — a
    distinction that was itself scientific and could be validated by scientific
    techniques in hiring. 

3.	Mental revolution. 

4.	**Cooperation, not individualism.** Taylor emphasized the interdependence of
    management and employees, both bound together in a collective venture, and
    both dependent on its success. Perhaps the most important element of this
    was the elimination of competition internally.  Instead, the aim is to
    achieve the harmony required. This was why Taylor was skeptical of unions —
    they risk creating a culture of ‘us and them’ that prevents the venture from
    cooperating effectively. 

5.	**Development of every person to their greatest efficiency and prosperity.**
    Scientific management was when training started to go mainstream in
    industry. Up to this point, the most common kind of training was
    apprenticeship — another legacy of the guilds. Training goes a step further
    — not everyone is lucky enough to be born into a relationship that matches
    their abilities. Instead, it is wise practice for an employer to guide their
    employees in ways that uses their abilities to the maximum benefit. 


At every step of the way, the approach was about replacing the human skills and
expertise of traditional management with a more scientific, even data-driven,
approach. 

## Scientific management today

Today, perhaps, the foremost company applying a modern variant scientific
management is Google. The actual methods used by Google are somewhat different
to those of Taylor, but the principle is the same: measure relentlessly, with a
view to replacing human expertise with automation and incentive wherever
possible. Cooperation is promoted by intentionally creating a social identity —
the “Googler” — and working with a reasonable degree of openness and
transparency internally. In this sense, Google is, perhaps, the most exemplary
*modern* company of the day. Decisions, such as those relating to hiring, use
scientific methods and data to the maximum extent possible. And finally, Google
has proven to be breathtakingly ruthless in eliminating individualism, and has
repeatedly terminated employees who distort its perceived harmony. 

This is worth remembering: the paradox of the world’s largest AI companies being
both visibly modernist and resistant to the paradoxes of postmodernism should be
enough to signal that AI is not a postmodernist technology, in any form. It is
pure reflexive modernity -- transforming our industrial society, not tradition.
Look at generative AI for images, for example: what is it aiming to transform?
Is it art? No, not at all. The goal is to transform the use of images in
advertising, and marketing. Art merely happens to be a convenient resource for
that transformation.

Not all technology companies are quite this focused on the methods of scientific
management. Microsoft, for example, notoriously used ‘stack ranking’
extensively: forcing managers to rank their team members in order of performance
and contribution, and using that ranking to determine rewards and compensation,
and very possibly to terminate those further down the ranking. As might be
expected, the consequence of this is competition *within* teams. Instead of
focusing on doing their jobs, employees focus on scoring better than their
peers, *by any means necessary*.[^StackRanking] After some time, they reversed this
practice.

[^StackRanking]: This should not be surprising. It is entirely consistent with Campbell’s
    Law: the more a measure is used for decision-making, especially when the
    stakes are high, the greater the risk that the measure will be corrupted.

The actual principles of scientific management vary a little — especially
between some of the pioneers of the field, like Frederick Winslow Taylor, Henry
Ford, Henry Gantt, and others. Although their methods and approaches varied a
little, they shared a common set of values: that science can be used to
modernize working practices in ways that improve efficiency and wealth for
employers. 

## Hyper-management

Today, as we might expect given the reflexive nature of modernity, the
improvements from scientific management have progressed into what we might call
“hyper-management”. This wholly new era of management is rooted in both
scientific management, and the data-driven technologies of artificial
intelligence. Let’s have a look at some examples:

### Incentives

Before scientific management, there were two common ways to pay workers:
”day-work” or “piece-work”, depending on whether workers were paid by the time
they worked or the amount they produced. Neither worked particularly well:
day-work encouraged working slowly (“soldiering”) and piece-work, in the long
term, can de-motivate if the high pay of a few workers leads to downgrading pay
per unit work. Scientific management, therefore, promoted profit-sharing as an
alternative model, one less likely to distort the incentivizing. As a secondary
effect, that also helps to align workers with management: instead of seeing
corporate profits as value to fight over, it is in everyone’s interest to
maximize it.

But hyper-management modernizes further, to a point where maybe employees aren’t
needed at all. Instead the “gig economy” eliminates the residual risks of even
having employees in the first place. This returns power squarely back to the
employers, and re-creates the antagonism between the corporation and its
workforce. 

### Recruitment

Scientific management relied on careful hiring, “selecting from the countless
types of possible workers only those whose mental or physical make-up especially
adapts them for the work at hand”. Hyper-management takes the recruitment
approach from scientific management, but exploits the use of data to take the
human factor out of the recruitment process. After all, there is no need to
choose a good fit for a role, when work is entirely individualized. 

In hyper-management, evidence as data is always central to the hiring process.
That may be qualitative (as in Google’s famed whiteboard interviews) but it
might also be quantitative (as in Netflix’s job assessment test). Coding
challenges are common — even if they are not particularly useful. As with all
hyper-management, qualitative factors are transformed into quantitative ones —
it is, after all, based on positivism.

### Training

Training was another important part of scientific management. Training is, after
all, in the employer’s interests as well as an employee’s. If an hour of
training makes an employee 10% more productive, that’s a very decent return on
the investment of that hour. So, employers are likely to recruit people
generically suitable for the roles they have in mind, and then put in
substantial work training people to meet any specific variations for the job in
practice.

Under hyper-management, training is significantly less important — it is one of
the factors that is most strongly individualized. In a global employment market,
employers might believe they can recruit people who already have the skills they
are looking for, or that employees should learn them on their own dime. In the
tech world, it is not at all uncommon to see adverts seeking people with five
years experience of a technology that has only existed for three years. This is
hyper-management — expecting the unreasonable and making a virtue of it.

### Cooperation

Scientific management emphasized aligning management and the workforce, so that
it was in everyone’s interest to cooperate. But under hyper-management, that
alignment is no longer required. Instead, there’s a drive to seek out the “10x”
employees who can do the work of a team of ten. These individuals might be much
more expensive than others, but they’re cheaper than a team. They might not be
as sustainable — after all, they highly valuable, and might quit — but in a
global market there’ll always be a replacement somewhere. 

### Individualization

Ultimately, an organization might even dispense with “doing” employees entirely,
and either outsource or offshore all the work, or subcontract it, or adopt a
business model that makes them unnecessary. Academic publishing is a good
example: articles are written by university employees, reviewed by other
university employees, and often edited by still other university employees — all
‘paid’ in prestige and career benefits. There really isn’t all that much left to
the publishers to do — which is why it has one of the most spectacular rates of
profit per dollar of revenue in commerce. But the basic principle applies
elsewhere, in the likes of Uber, AirBnB, Instacart, and so on, too. If you can
dispense with a workforce, you can dispense with profit sharing, training, and
even healthcare benefits. After all, if you don’t have a workforce, there’s no
need to invest in it.

## Guilds and unions

One of the best ways to limit risk is to work together. This is, perhaps, the
fundamental principle of society. As Margaret Mead put it, the first evidence of
true civilization was a healed femur. Why? Because that meant that someone who
had a broken bone had — through the help of others — managed to heal and
contribute to that society. In this case, the risk of illness or infirmity is
shared within a social group, so that all can benefit. From this early
collaboration we have developed more ingeniously complex ways of working
together to manage risks, both natural and manufactured.

One of the was a professional guild. This time, instead of pooling the risk of
ill health, it pools the risk of lack of work. 

Both traditional scientific management and modern approaches adopted by the
likes of Google and Uber are united in hostility to trade unions. In many ways
this is a shame, because while unions do have some problems, they also simplify
engaging the workforce into decision-making. They can, for example, as a kind of
‘conscience’ for an organization, counterbalancing the purely fiduciary
responsibilities management may have to shareholders. Typical unions are
member-led organizations that have several goals, including:

* Representing their members, collectively and individually, especially when
  negotiating with employers over pay and conditions.
* Advocating for their members, with employers, to improve conditions and safety
* Lobbying governments to improve regulations for the benefit of members and
  wider society

But this tension is not surprising: after all, some key aspects of scientific
management — such as performance-related pay — are not traditionally palatable
to unions. 

Some of the older unions trace their origins back before modernization, to
medieval guilds. And in fact some ‘unions’ today — such as the Fraternal Order
of Police — are surprisingly like their historical counterparts, even retaining
‘eye of providence’ symbology to this day. And yet, the one basis they hold in
common is that they act as a unified negotiating block with employers,
governments, and other stakeholders. When working conditions, and especially
pay, were poor, as a union they could bring more pressure for change than they
could individually. 

Today, unions are surprisingly limited compared to their equivalents in recent
past history — this is one of the more visible manifestations of
individualization. In some cases, and especially in public roles, unions even
might be illegal, or at least significantly limited in the actions they can
take. In practice, much of it has devolved into a “if you can’t take the heat,
stay out of the kitchen” pattern for work roles, with the pressures falling
substantially on the shoulders of employees. 

<div markdown="1" class="box">

## How do you score on the evil CEO persona?

Take this quiz and find out:

|                                                 | Never | Sometimes | Often  | Always   |
|-------------------------------------------------|:-----:|:---------:|:------:|:--------:|
| I impose my will on others                      | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I try to surpass others' accomplishments        | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I insist that others do things my way           | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I believe that I am always right                | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I deserve special treatment from others         | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I need to be the center of attention            | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I like to trick people into doing things for me | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I find it easy to manipulate others             | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I have a natural talent for influencing people  | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
| I believe people should fend for themselves     | 1     | 2         | 3      | 4        |
{:.w-100.table.table-striped.table-sm}

Add your scores to find how evil your CEO persona is:

If you scored:

* **10-17** -- not at all evil, you're likely too nice to be a CEO
* **18-24** -- a little bit evil
* **25-30** -- evil enough that you are annoying people
* **31-36** -- really quite evil, your employees are probably preparing a hole
  in the basement
* **37-40** -- hello Elon

</div>

## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
