---
chapter: 10
title: Intellectual property
layout: chapter
sitemap: false
---

## Intellectual property and modernization

One of the biggest factors enabling modernization was the development and
evolution of a new kind of property -- intellectual property. If I grow a box of
potatoes and trade it, the person who buys is now the new owner of the potatoes,
but I have something else in return. This trade enables people to use their
expertise in a way that everybody gains. Intellectual property creates some new
rules that allow us to trade in things that aren't physical objects, like ideas,
words, songs, and inventions.

If I write a book and sell it, while — just like the potatoes — I no longer own
the physical book itself. But, the book is not only a physical object, it also
contains my thoughts, my ideas. It would be a problem if the person I sold my book to
could just print a thousand copies and sell them -- they would be the one benefiting
from all my work. So, intellectual property rights create a fair system that
enables a trade in ideas and inventions. 

For example, copyright means that without my permission, nobody else can print
the book and sell it. These are the “economic rights”. But what I can do, I can
‘sell’[^Sell] my economic rights to a book to the publisher, and then they own
the rights, and can more or less do what they like. Economic rights are usually
time-limited, so eventually they expire and the works become free.  

[^Sell]: Whether you can really sell a piece of intellectual property depends on the
    jurisdiction and the type of property. In some places, all you can do is
    sell a license to the use the property, along with a contractual obligation
    not to use it yourself. In others, you really can sell your stake in the
    property.

A second feature of copyright is that I keep the right to be identified as the
author, this is one of a few “moral rights” — at least, that’s the way it works
in most of the world. So, even if they do own the right to sell, the publisher
can’t simply put someone else’s name on the book. I also keep the right to
protect the integrity of the work. In other words, if the publisher’s
exploitation of the economic rights (which they may have paid for) affects my
reputation, as an author, I can use my moral rights to step in. In some places,
like the US, moral rights can be waived (effectively, legally promising never to
use them), but in others, such as much of Europe, they cannot be waived. 

This fair system makes trade in ideas and inventions possible. It is not a
stretch to say that without intellectual property rights, capitalism itself, as
we know it today, could not exist.

And this makes sense: if people are to survive in any other way than by growing
all their own potatoes, the risks associated with other forms of production have
to be contained. And that is what intellectual property does. 

But obviously kings don't have the time to print books -- or the expertise, for
that matter. The solution was for the monarchs to grant permission to use
printing presses to an elite group which would be under their control, in the
form of a power which could be recalled if required. These permissions from
sovereigns were 'letters patent', patent meaning "open", as these letters were
intended to be used to verify the authority to print. These early letters patent
evolved into the systems for granting rights to exploit inventions that we still
use today.

In some cases, these assets are entirely manufactured. Domain names are a good 
example. Once the domain name system was invented, it enabled an almost infinite
variety of domain names to be created and owned. 

## Intellectual property and feudalism

But there is a price to be paid for enabling ownership in intellectual property,
over and above the trade it supports. Is the concept of intellectual property
implicitly forcing us to apply a feudal style of ownership to ideas? And if so,
what does this mean for society and the greater good?

These questions are troubling, not least because the corporate artificial
intelligence community’s wholesale appropriation of art, literature, and code
under the guise of “fair use” -- despite their blatant intention to complete with
authors of art, literature, and code -- strains credibility to the point that
ownership of intellectual property itself may be starting to break down. Or
perhaps that is the plan – like the velociraptors in Jurassic Park, OpenAI and
similar companies are testing the fences of property rights systematically for
weaknesses they can exploit.

In this case, companies like Meta, Google, OpenAI, and Adobe are challenging
whether they can reach into other people’s property for their own commercial
goals. Or maybe they are putting up new fences, in a new kind of adverse
possession, seizing intellectual property and daring society to contest it, in
the hope that what they’ve created is too big to fail.

As we have seen, while historically automation focused on improving the
production of physical goods, it has gone beyond that. The latest generation of
artificial intelligence models, in particular, are capable of automatically
generating images and computer code, for example. These have at least a 
passing resemblance to the fruits of human creative work. 

But this is where things get sticky. A common feature of of copyright, patents,
and similar intellectual property, is that they must result from real (human)
labour. Anything that is trivial or automated simply cannot be owned. If you
design a logo, or compose a piece of music, using dice or a random number
generator – or, indeed, any other algorithm – it isn’t yours; it isn’t
*anybody’s*.

Interestingly, Open AI tries to push the envelope here:

> “**Ownership of content.** As between you and OpenAI, and to the extent permitted
> by applicable law, you (a) retain your ownership rights in Input and (b) own
> the Output. We hereby assign to you all our right, title, and interest, if
> any, in and to Output.” *(OpenAI Terms of Use)*

Over and beyond the technicalities of whether a “creative” (copyrightable,
patentable) artifact generated by algorithm can be owned, automation also has a
second effect: it shifts the burden of effort (labour, if you like) from the
creator to the consumer. As Beck (1992, p220) puts it: ...

## Open source, open data

Open source works in a very different way. In open source, the whole concept of
ownership is transformed. If someone is employed by, say, Oracle, anything they
build will normally be owned by Oracle, as their employer. Therefore, it is
Oracle — and therefore, ultimately its CEO and management — that decides on any
conditions for its use. 

But compare that to open source, such as Linux. Linux as a trademark is owned by
Linus Torvalds, but that doesn’t affect the software itself, just the use of the
name. If I as an individual write a particular feature for Linux, it stays owned
by me (or, if I am working for Oracle, owned by Oracle). The difference is that
there is an additional license agreement which guarantees that this feature can
be used, by anyone, as part of the same open source work. And this same license
agreement prevents me from revoking permission to that feature — once I have
provided it to everyone, I can’t take it back. 

So there is no single owner: an open source work is like each one of us bringing
a few Lego bricks to a party and building a house out of it, and agreeing that
nobody can pull the house apart again. The house exists, but no single person
owns it.

So how do collectives like this coordinate? In many ways, they face the exact
same problem that the Rochdale Pioneers faced when setting up a co-operative. 

If you like, you can counterpoint this with Eric Raymond’s metaphor[^ESR] — for
him, open source development is a kind of homesteading, a colonization of an
untamed wilderness of ideas he calls (following Pierre Teilhard de Chardin) the
*noosphere*.  

[^ESR]: Eric Raymond (or ESR as he is usually known) is one of a cadre of
    libertarian software developers.

This is an interesting take: in a real sense he is proposing that creation is
impossible in open source -- all that can be done is discovery.

## Discovery and creation

Why do people believe that the results of their interactions with tools like
DALL-E are *theirs* in any meaningful sense, rather than, almost as with
patents, *discoveries* of the latent potentials in the model? For that matter,
why do we feel that discoveries can be owned at all, even with patents? Insulin
is a naturally-occurring substance, encoded in the human genome. Should it be
patentable?

There is, interestingly, a case for a naive theory of ownership, much like naive
physics and naive psychology (Nancekivell *et al.*, 2019). This naive theory
comprises an understanding of ownership, rights, control over one's possessions,
and using ownership to predict and interpret other people's emotional reactions.
As with others naive theories, this begins to emerge at a young age. 

This also extends to a theory of how ownership can be created. For example,
there is evidence that even very young children (2 or 3 years old) regard things
that they invest effort into making as 'theirs' (Kanngiesser & Hood, 2014). In
other words, we tend to think that stuff we put effort into is 'ours' -- and
this affects how we react to it. 

In other words, behind all forms of intellectual property, there is a "common
sense property right", which runs something like: "if I put work into making
something, it is a piece of 'property' that is mine by right, and I can use it
as I see fit". 

In some ways, this *natural* aspect to copyright has a real substance to it. For
example, the *droit d'auteur* of French law, which was profoundly influential to
the Berne Convention, includes the concept of *moral rights*, distinct from the
purely economic rights of copyright developed through the English common law
system. These rights come from the author's *natural rights* to benefit from
their labour. 

So we have a fundamental conflict: according to both psychology and natural law,
we have a right to benefit from our labour, but if our labour was in the form of
guiding or managing an algorithm, there's no property there to be *ours* to
benefit from.

That's because, intriguingly, what's been 'generated' hasn't been created so
much as *discovered*. Whatever the output is, it is a pattern that was latent
within the model, but we have revealed it. It may even be that we have
'discovered' an item from the training data *verbatim*. 

And although we tend to think that we should 'own' a discovery (cf., for
example, all of colonialism) that is a very different proposition.

{:.mark} 
There are also important points to make about Fluxus, such as Cale's point that
'letting go' of artistic control (through automation, technology, randomization)
can actually increase the pressure on artistic work, and we need to make that
base, but this might not be the right place to do that.


## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}
