---
layout: post
title: 'A quick Flutter'
author: Stuart
background: '/img/posts/cell-phone-butterfly.jpg'
summary: >-
  What's the best way to build a native mobile application? Let me try some options...
image: '/img/posts/cell-phone-butterfly.jpg'
image_description: "A cell phone with a butterfly in front of a mountainous island"
---

Today, I thought I'd have a quick Flutter.

I've built a few different 'native' applications using cross-platform techniques
over the past few years, including:

* Ionic and Apache Cordova
* React Native

But, with [Flutter](https://flutter.dev/) now being in play, I thought I'd review 
my options, and see which seems to be the best fit for my current needs and preferences.

For the most part, what I want in a way to build native applications is a vaguely
portable set of UI components, and a language that quickly lets me assemble them
into a product that looks and feels native to the environment.

Strangely, the actual best experience I had building portable native applications,
many many years ago, was using Procyon Common Lisp. Procyon Common Lisp had a beautifully
designed layer, 'Common Graphics', that was sufficiently planned you could build applications
for both Windows and Macintoshes, back in the Windows 3.1 era (i.e., the early 1990s). 

Common Graphics was so central to our deployment at the time, that the company I worked
for acquired the whole Procyon company entirely, and sold its excellent Lisp for Windows to Franz Inc. around 1991, while 
retaining full rights to use it internally. I even built a fair few parts of the
Windows Lisp, so we could bring our products out on Windows more speedily. Procyon's Common Lisp
for Windows metamorphosed into Allegro Common Lisp for Windows, and
[Common Graphics remains part of it to this day](https://franz.com/support/documentation/10.1/doc/cgide.htm).
The Mac variant, not entirely surprisingly, has fallen away -- it was, after all,
developed long before macOS OSX became a thing. 

The advantage of Common Graphics was that it abstracted away differences, so
you got a real Apple menu bar, or a real Windows menu bar, depending on your
platform. You do lose a little fine-grained control, but it genuinely feels
native, because underneath, it is native. 

If you want, you can look at some (old) Common Graphics code, as it was used in 
production, in our [visual cognitive modelling language, Hank](https://github.com/morungos/hank).
Generally, anything there in the Lisp package `CG` was Common Graphics. 

The result was: we could build a more or less native application, in Lisp, with
platform look-and-feel, for both Windows and Macs. (You may think Lisp was 
hideously big as a language, some were concerned about that: the reality was
this application used about 1Mb of memory, and maybe 2Mb of disk, when deployed.)

## What I want for native app development

So what I am after is something similar, but for mobile, i.e.:

* A dynamic language to expression control, logic, and everything I need to do
* A thin but considered layer that smooths over differences between native components
* Ability to drop down to direct native when needed

Debugging is key to this: I want an environment where I can make changes and 
immediately interact with them. I admit it, I've been spoiled by web technologies
the same was I was with Lisp environments all those yeas ago.

And this is where options like [Flutter](https://flutter.dev/), and [Ionic](https://ionicframework.com/), 
[Cordova](https://cordova.apache.org/), [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/), and 
[NativeScript](https://nativescript.org/)
all aim to provide a platform for developers like me.

## [Flutter](https://flutter.dev/)

Flutter is Google's approach. It uses [Dart](https://dart.dev/) as its main control language, and provides
its own UI components. For Android, it's very good. For iOS, it initially looks like it's Android, i.e.,
material design is the default.

In theory, Flutter can build for web too, but by default it does so in an unusual way -- 
it renders to a canvas rather than a normal set of elements. That provides extremely
precise layout control, but at a price: what you're working with is not exactly web
technology. CSS and layout aren't used. 

And although there is an HTML renderer, it is not exactly conventional HTML. It
uses web components, which can have tiny canvas elements inside for
display. It's not the HTML your grandparents would have used. 

In a way, that's not a big surprise. After all: we may be building apps for a platform
that doesn't use CSS, so we should expect CSS there anyway. For example, Apple TV's 
operating system doesn't include web views at all, so CSS can't really apply.

It's quite an achievement, but Flutter reminds me a lot more of Adobe Flash and
Adobe AIR than conventional native applications. If you need pixel-precise
rendering across platforms, it's great. On the other hand, it's a big ecosystem
all to itself, and it feels like there's a real risk of getting locked into it.
Switching away from Flutter, for example, would involve a complete rewrite of 
every single thing.

## [Cordova](https://cordova.apache.org/), [Ionic](https://ionicframework.com/), and friends

The Apache Cordova/Ionic approach is a bit different. It depends much more on 
web components, even on mobile. In many ways, it's a way of making a small
single-page application run as if it's a native application. So, for these
technologies, HTML and CSS are far more important. And, therefore, some 
platforms like the Apple TV are out of reach. 

You can choose from a few options to write the SPA part of your application.
When I first used Ionic, it mostly used AngularJS, but now Angular, React,
and Vue are all available options.

But what if we want to add some extra native logic? Well, these platforms
allow us to use plugins that may include Objective C, for example, or we 
can simply package in some of our own Objective C code. But the rest of our 
application is more or less standard JavaScript. Ionic adds a new platform
for that, [Capacitor](https://capacitorjs.com/), where Cordova has a decent, solid, plugin system, but
more dependent on community support.

Underneath it all, though, your app is running on Safari-like or Chrome-like
web view, and it's a set of web styling layers that allows you to model the
appearance on a native device. But, like Flutter, it's not really using native
display. Unlike Flutter, it is using moderately standard web techniques 
underneath, though.

## [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/)

React Native goes the exact opposite direction. While it looks superficially like
a web application framework, the display components are purely native. Layout
and styling have a kind of CSS-like layer, but it's more for convenience than
an accurate picture of how it works. HTML is entirely gone, and replaced by
more or less direct access to native components. As with Cordova,
the control and logic is more or less standard JavaScript. However, 
unlike Cordova, it's native components, so we can, for example, deploy to
devices like an Apple TV without a web view.

For display control, React Native uses something almost entirely, but not
quite, like CSS -- it even there it is somewhat more like a single file 
component than traditional React, although with an awful JSXified syntax.

React Native's big win is [Expo](https://expo.dev/), which allows apps to be debugged and developed
on native (and web) devices with far less deployment misery than via, for example, Xcode.
This means no need, for example, for developer subscriptions on Apple.

## [NativeScript](https://nativescript.org/)

NativeScript is closely similar to React Native, although without being
locked to React. In fact, you can choose between several basic architectures.
At the moment, I'm enjoying Svelte, so I can use Svelte to write my native
application, which is fine by me. I get all the native components, but I
can share logic, stores, and so on, with a regular web application.

As with React Native (and unlike Cordova), there is no deep dependence on HTML 
views, which leads to a noticeably smoother user experience, and fewer 
odd display effects inherited from Safari.

There has been some work on integrating Expo links to NativeScript,
but it is not well-developed yet.

NativeScript does make some attempt to use CSS, but there are some components
where it really doesn't work, and you have to use properties directly.

## A sort of summary

|       | Flutter  | Ionic/Cordova | React Native | NativeScript |
|------ | -------- | ------------- | ------------ | ------------ |
| **Web outputs** | Yes (but awful) | Not really | Yes (but awful) | No |
| **Live reloading** | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| **Viable without HTML views** | Yes | No | Yes | Yes |
| **Debugging** | Specific tools, e.g. VS Code plugins | Web cross-device | Built-in developer menu | Remote through VSCode |
| **Packaging** | Custom | Customized Webpack | Custom (Metro) | Customized Webpack |
| **Display** | Portable runtime | Web styling/CSS | Native UI | Native UI/CSS |
| **Control language** | Dart | JavaScript | JavaScript | JavaScript |
| **Architecture** | Specific to Flutter | Angular, Vue, React | React | Angular, Vue, Svelte, React |
| **Origin** | Google | Apache | Facebook | OpenJS (incl. Google, IBM, MS) |

So, it does depend on what you want. If you want a quick way to develop an 
application that looks smooth, and handles a wide range of devices, including
non-mobile apps and web, Flutter is an option. If you want deep native
access and the sharpness and gloss that provides (and believe me, I noticed
the difference in feel) then React Native and NativeScript will have
the edge.

But it's important not to over-emphasize the differences. Ionic/Cordova, React Native, NativeScript
in particular, have a lot in common. Flutter, to me at least, felt like it had more 
in common with a Java-like version of Adobe's AIR than with any of the others. It does have similar aims, too:
targeting standalone desktop apps as well as mobile. (Although it's worth remembering that, 
conceptually at least, Ionic/Cordova has a lot in common with Electron-based applications 
-- in fact, it more or less *is* a modified Electron, hence the flexibility in
web technology.)

Here's how I'd sum the options up:

* Do you want to target desktop and web with the same build? Use Flutter, Ionic, Cordova, or accept the misery of parallel apps.
  Of course, with Electron, desktop has long been relatively easy to target using the Ionic/Cordova strategy
  of CSS and a collection of API plugins.

* Do you want the gloss of native UI? Use React Native, or NativeScript if you don't like React.

## And a personal summary

And no, I didn't especially like Flutter, in the same way I didn't like Adobe AIR.
For this small app, I've switched over to NativeScript, which gives me some native
UI and familiar JavaScript, and Svelte as a framework, while also opening up to 
Capacitor for extensions.
