---
layout: post
title: 'Intellectual property and feudalism'
author: Stuart
background: '/img/posts/Reeve_and_Serfs.jpg'
summary: >-
  Is the concept of intellectual property implicitly forcing us to apply a feudal
  style of ownership to ideas? And if so, what does this mean for society and the
  greater good?
image: '/img/posts/Reeve_and_Serfs.jpg'
image_description: |-
  Medieval illustration of men harvesting wheat with reaping-hooks
  or sickles, on a calendar page for August. Queen Mary's Psalter 
  (Ms. Royal 2. B. VII), fol. 78v
---

**Is the concept of intellectual property implicitly forcing us to apply a *feudal*
style of ownership to ideas? And if so, what does this mean for society and the
greater good?**

These questions have been troubling me for a while. In part, that's because the
corporate artificial intelligence community's wholesale appropriation of art,
literature, and code under the guise of "fair use" -- despite their blatant
intention to complete with authors of art, literature, and code -- strains
credibility to the point that ownership of intellectual property itself may be
starting to break down. Or perhaps that is the plan -- like the velociraptors in
Jurassic Park, OpenAI and similar companies are testing the fences of property
rights systematically for weaknesses they can exploit. 

In this case, companies like Meta, Google, OpenAI, and Adobe are challenging
whether they can reach into other people's property for their own commercial
goals. Or maybe they are putting up new fences, in a new kind of [adverse
possession](https://legaldictionary.net/adverse-possession/), seizing
intellectual property and daring society to contest it, in the hope that what
they've created is too big to fail. 

These companies are not our friends. They have one goal: monopolization. What is
worse, they're very good at using the social mechanisms we have created around
intellectual property and its rights, to strengthen their monopolies. Given half
a chance, they want to be government-appointed regulators, paid officially from
the public purse to control our rights.

How did we get into this mess? We live in an era of modernization, and three
factors, combined, hold us back from creating an effective social good: modernization, 
common-sense theories of ownership, and a model of property rights which
strongly echoes feudal land control.

## 1. Modernization of intellectual property generation

The first contributor to the problem is modernization, and especially
automation. While historically automation focused on improving the production of
physical goods, it has gone beyond that. The latest generation of artificial
intelligence models, in particular, are capable of automatically generating
images and computer code, for example.

But this is where things get sticky. A common feature of of copyright, patents,
and similar intellectual property, is that they must result from real labour.
Anything that is trivial or automated cannot be owned. If you design a logo, or
compose a piece of music, using dice or a random number generator -- or, indeed,
any other algorithm -- it isn't yours; it isn't *anybody's*. 

Traditionally anything generated algorithmically cannot be copyrighted or
patented, it's un-ownable -- not un-owned or communally owned like a commons --
but un-ownable. There's no labour in them, so they aren't even property. 

Interestingly, OpenAI attempt to push the envelope of ownership here:

> "**Ownership of content.** As between you and OpenAI, and to the extent permitted
> by applicable law, you (a) retain your ownership rights in Input and (b) own
> the Output. We hereby assign to you all our right, title, and interest, if
> any, in and to Output." ([OpenAI Terms of Use](https://openai.com/policies/terms-of-use/))

But over and beyond the technicalities of whether a "creative" (copyrightable,
patentable) artifact generated by algorithm can be owned, automation also has a
second effect: it shifts the burden of effort (labour, if you like) from the
*creator* to the *consumer*. As Beck (1992, p220) puts it:

> "The wave of automation in the service sector can thus be understood as a
> transfer of labor from production to consumption, from the specialist to the
> general public, from compensa­tion to self-participation." (Beck, 1992, p220)

This transfer of labour is important, because it triggers a change in the
psychology of ownership -- even if there is nothing that should be legally
ownable. So let's look at how people account for this ownership, psychologically.

## 2. The naive psychology of ownership

Why do people believe that the results of their interactions with tools like
DALL-E are *theirs* in any meaningful sense, rather than, almost as with
patents, *discoveries* of the latent potentials in the model? For that matter,
why do we feel that discoveries can be owned at all, even with patents? Insulin
is a naturally-occurring substance, encoded in the human genome. Should it be
patentable?

There is, interestingly, a case for a naive theory of ownership, much like naive
physics and naive psychology (Nancekivell *et al.*, 2019). This naive theory
comprises an understanding of ownership, rights, control over one's possessions,
and using ownership to predict and interpret other people's emotional reactions.
As with others naive theories, this begins to emerge at a young age. 

This also extends to a theory of how ownership can be created. For example,
there is evidence that even very young children (2 or 3 years old) regard things
that they invest effort into making as 'theirs' (Kanngiesser & Hood, 2014). In
other words, we tend to think that stuff we put effort into is 'ours' -- and
this affects how we react to it. 

In other words, behind all forms of intellectual property, there is a "common
sense property right", which runs something like: "if I put work into making
something, it is a piece of 'property' that is mine by right, and I can use it
as I see fit". 

In some ways, this *natural* aspect to copyright has a real substance to it. For
example, the *droit d'auteur* of French law, which was profoundly influential to
the Berne Convention, includes the concept of *moral rights*, distinct from the
purely economic rights of copyright developed through the English common law
system. These rights come from the author's *natural rights* to benefit from
their labour. 

So we have a fundamental conflict: according to both psychology and natural law,
we have a right to benefit from our labour, but if our labour was in the form of
guiding or managing an algorithm, there's no property there to be *ours* to
benefit from.

That's because, intriguingly, what's been 'generated' hasn't been created so
much as *discovered*. Whatever the output is, it is a pattern that was latent
within the model, but we have revealed it. It may even be that we have
discovered an item from the training data verbatim. 

And although we tend to think that we should 'own' a discovery (cf., for
example, all of colonialism) that is a very different proposition.

## 3. Neo-feudal industrial policies of intellectual property

The third factor is the economic structural aspects of ownership of intellectual
property. As we've seen, there's a kind of "common sense" theory of ownership at
a personal level, but what of the reality at a grander scale: legal and social. 

The way intellectual property rights are supposed to work -- or at least how
they were justified as laws -- was that they incentivized innovation and
creation by offering a deal. If you make or discover something, you could have a
temporary monopoly on it, in return for its eventual transition to a public
asset. 

Let's see how this should work in practice. Imagine that you have invented a new
kind of light bulb, and want to make it and sell it. But to do so, you need an
investment so you can begin to produce them. The idea here is to file a patent
for your invention. This costs a little money, but it grants you that temporary
monopoly, during which time, lets you stop anyone else making copies of your
technology without your consent. This patent, therefore, has a roughly
quantifiable financial future value, because (assuming your product is worth
selling) you have that monopoly on future sales for a specific number of years.
This patent might be valuable enough that you can use it to ask investors for money --
they will now assess your company as being valuable because you have this
patent. Your company can literally have no other assets, and still be worth
millions because of this one patent. 

But this value is a fiction. You haven't yet made or sold a single light bulb. 

If you want to look at a real example of this, consider Tesla. Tesla is assessed
by the stock market as [more valuable than Ford and General Motors
combined](https://www.visualcapitalist.com/teslas-valuation-surpasses-ford-and-gm-combined/).
And yet, Ford and GM together sell well over 5,000,000 vehicles a year globally,
while Tesla has [yet to beat
500,000](https://www.cnbc.com/2024/01/02/tesla-tsla-q4-2023-vehicle-delivery-and-production-numbers.html),
and many of those are stuck in parking lots because nobody wants to buy them.
Tesla's value is a fiction sold on an expectation to generate *future* wealth,
not an assessment of its current value. 

But it's worse than that. This valuation matters beyond Tesla itself -- it
attracts capital investment from elsewhere in society based on this fiction in a
way that supports Tesla, not other companies that have more realistic
valuations. Tesla's high and fictitious valuation actively limits the ability of
other companies to compete with them. 

Someone might comment that Tesla has undertaken not to enforce its patents.
However, in practice, [it has done
so](https://electrek.co/2023/07/17/tesla-sues-supercapacitor-company-over-patent-infringement-despite-open-patent-pledge/).
This is because Tesla has a "good faith" clause which means all bets are off if
you sue Tesla. They still own the patents, and can still enforce them. They
appear to have weaponized their patent portfolio into a tool to dissuade anyone
from suing them for anything. It's a "don't poke the bear" strategy,
essentially. [Meta, by the way, does the exact same thing with
React.](https://engineering.fb.com/2017/08/18/open-source/explaining-react-s-license/)
Although they say they believe it will "reduce meritless litigation", in
practice this is asymmetric. Meta can take your intellectual property, but if
you attempt to assert your rights, then all bets are off.

It is worth reflecting on the parallels between land ownership and intellectual
property rights. The first patents were for land -- land patents still exist in
the US. In a feudal system the land was held by an oligarchy that authorized
their subordinates (such as "copyholders") to use that land -- in return for
monetary and other rewards. It was, and remains, a monopolistic system -- opposed to
the concept of social ownership and social good. 

So in practice, many of our modern property rights, therefore, are unequal. The
idea of an incandescent light bulb, or an electric vehicle, or an algorithm for
image processing -- these are "gifts of nature" (Smith, 2009, p56), just as the
land is. Rights to these should be conditional, not exclusive. 

## Economic democracy

That's how we got here, so how do we get out of the mess?

The most appealing way forward, to me, is economic democracy (Smith, 2009). Yes,
it's a form of "socialism" (and I know that for many that puts it only slightly
better than Satan in the canons of evil). But it's not state socialism, nothing
remotely like communism. Think credit unions and co-operatives, not Stalin. But
also, it's not libertarian neoliberal free-markets-to-the-max. 

Under economic democracy, "capital", even "capitalism" still have a purpose.
They are not the true evil. The true evil is monopolistic control by the
wealthy. Banks can be socially owned (as building societies and credit unions
are). Rights are *conditional*, not exclusive -- people can still be (should be,
in fact) rewarded for their discoveries, but they don't 'own' them. Instead of
allowing the wealthy to enclose and monopolize the commons, society rewards
anyone who adds to them.

For *discoveries*, this works nicely. Discovering a new drug, or a new
algorithm, or a new material doesn't mean you get to own it, but it does mean
you should be paid appropriately for that discovery -- from the common social
fund. And anyone who wants to benefit from those innovations can then do so.

But *creations* (for want of a better word) work differently. The text of *Don
Quixote* was not lying in wait to be discovered -- it was the creation of one
man. Again, society needs to reward artists and authors, but there is an important
difference. Sooner or later, someone would have invented the light bulb, or
discovered the law of gravity. But if there had been no Cervantes, there would have
been no *Don Quixote*. A creation is latent within an individual, where a discovery
is latent in nature. We might still want to reward people, but we should use a 
different logic -- one that resembles copyright more than patents. 

But what about generative artificial intelligence? It should be obvious: someone
else discovering the same prompt might generate the same results. Unlike *Don
Quixote* or the Mona Lisa, the results are no longer dependent on the person using
the generative artificial intelligence, but on the training data.

This leads us to a significant conclusion:

> **The outputs from generative artificial intelligence are not *creations*, they
> are *discoveries* of latent features within the training data.**

As such, they are not 'owned' by the creators of the model; after all, they are
produced algorithmically. Even more certainly, they are also not 'owned' by the
users of the model -- not even if considerable labour has gone into the
prompting or their discovery -- despite the intuitive theories of common sense
ownership. They could, arguably, be co-owned by the creators of the training
data -- but not in a way that makes them 'commons'. In other words, if your
model generates a McDonalds trademark, that trademark stands. If it reproduces
GPL code, it remains GPL code. And so on.

That is not to say that discoveries are not significant, and that they don't take
labour to generate. They do. But the way we reward them is inappropriate. For example, 
security vulnerabilities in operating systems aren't *owned*, companies pay a reward
(bounty) to those who report them. 

## What next?

We stand at a crossroads on intellectual property. 

Today, the likes of OpenAI, Google, Meta, and Adobe have tried to enclose the
commons. Worse, it was never commons to begin with: they've enclosed the actual
creations of skilled artists and authors, just as English landowners did,
seizing the property of others and society for themselves. They have done so on
the claim of "fair use", essentially pretending that they are creating social
good. They are not. They are enclosing any rights they can get their grubby
little hands on -- and unlike land, the scale of intellectual property is more
or less infinite. In some cases, they have attempted to use licensing to defend
that right, but in doing so, they are following the path of the feudal lords who
treat creators as peasants, forcing them to allow unlimited use of their
rights in exchange for access to social resources. 

Secondly, their current approach resembles nothing so much as copyright
laundering. If OpenAI had their way, *Don Quixote* could be claimed equally by
Cervantes and Pierre Menard[^PierreMenard], and OpenAI would have rights to
everything their models produce -- even if that product is exactly identical to
training data. In other words, the original labour and its claim to ownership is
entirely erased.

We do not have to accept this. We can reframe intellectual property rights
within an economic democratic model. When we do so, much remains: creators and 
artists and inventors still get paid, but society structures it in a way that
reduces the risks of exploitation. Money is not the enemy -- monopolization is.
Our neo-feudal corporate overlords are busily working to erase our labour for a
reason -- erasing our labour (even as a fiction) erases our claims to ownership,
leaving all property to them, forever.[^Libertarian]

Making a distinction between a discovery and a creation allows us to be more
nuanced in our handling of intellectual property -- particularly when it comes
to automation and artificial intelligence. With this distinction, we reveal the 
copyright games the corporations are playing, and give ourselves the tools we 
need to preserve our rights to benefit from our labour.

[^PierreMenard]: This allusion to Borges is fully intentional. In a real sense,
    Borges is playing with the distinction between creation and discovery. For
    his fictional Menard, *Don Quixote* was a pure form to be discovered. As the
    account goes:
    
    > "My purpose is merely astonishing;' he wrote me on September 30, 1934,
    > from Bayonne. "The final term of a theological or metaphysical proof-the
    > world around us, or God, or chance, or universal Forms-is no more final, no
    > more uncommon, than my revealed novel" (*Pierre Menard, Author of the
    > Quixote*, p91).

    Borges explores this intriguing reframing of creation-as-discovery again in
    *The Library of Babel* -- an finite but immense library where every possible
    book is waiting to be found. 

[^Libertarian]: The irony of a supposedly libertarian culture attempting to
    restructure society in a way that other people's claims to property are
    removed will not, I hope, be lost on anyone.


## Notes

* footnotes will be placed here. This line is necessary
{:footnotes}

# References

Beck, U. (1992). *Risk Society: Towards a new modernity*. SAGE Publications.

Borges, J.-L. (1962). Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote. In *Labyrinths* (tr. Irby, J. E.) 
New Directions

Kanngiesser, P., & Hood, B. M. (2014). Young children’s understanding of
ownership rights for newly made objects. *Cognitive Development*, *29*, 30–40.

Nancekivell, S. A., Friedman, O., & Gelman, S. A. (2019). Ownership matters:
people possess a naïve theory of ownership. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, *23*(2),
102–113.

Smith, J. W. (2009). Money: A Mirror Image of the Economy. Institute for Economic Democracy.

<hr>

Image: [Medieval illustration of the lord's reeve overseeing serfs at harvest time. Queen Mary's Psalter (Ms. Royal 2. B. VII), fol. 78v[1].](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Reeve_and_Serfs.jpg?uselang=en#Licensing)