---
layout: post
title: "Tariffs and technology: building resilience against rogue corporations"
author: Stuart
background: '/img/posts/slidey0136.jpg'
summary: >-
  As a technology sector, how should we prepare to reduce the risks of aggressive
  trade behaviours from a rogue United States?
image: '/img/posts/slidey0136.jpg'
image_description: |-
  Quiraing, on the Isle of Skye, with mists in the foreground, and a little wisp of cloud above
---

Okay, I'm cross. Not just a little bit cross, very cross.

This is not the first time, either. When I lived in Aberdeen in Scotland, my
then university employer gave a certain Donald J. Trump an honorary degree,
because he was <strike>claiming</strike> lying that he was going to boost the local economy by
building a golf course there.

For the full story, see the documentary movie [*You've Been
Trumped*](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1943873/), but suffice to say, he played
this by, among other things, blockading local residents, cutting off their water
supply, lying to local police to get journalists arrested, and destroying a site
of special scientific interest. 

Anyway, we should be clear, in Scotland we saw that Donald J. Trump is a bully,
and now Canada and other countries are waking up the a new world where the
United States that he apparently controls absolutely is not a friend, not an
ally, and not a reliable trading partner. 

### But what about the technology sector?

The technology sector has been *particularly* complicit in this. I could go on
at length on the reasons, but I won't bore you just yet. It is entirely clear,
though, that Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, Larry Ellison, Tobi Lutke,
to name but a few, see an aggressive Trump administration with absolute control
over global trade as an opportunity to consolidate their particular domination
over technology. They may even dislike him, I don't care -- they clearly see him
as *useful* to their agenda. 

We have a choice -- those of us outside the United States -- do we accept this,
or not? 

**I vote no. We deserve better.**

We cannot change technology as easily as I can pop to the farmers' market and by
local potatoes. If only. But we can and must question whether US dominance is
good for us. Does the fact that global technology is in the hands of these
people add a new dimension of risk to our work? The risk that our hosting
services could be shut down, our payment systems blocked, our ability to publish
apps denied, all based on political influence. Take a look at X, and see how
this plays: decisions about who gets shut out are based on political compliance,
not freedom of speech. That could be the technology world of the future, if 
these people have their way.

Most technology people I know absolutely hate these kinds of risks.

### What can we do about it?

We need the following:

1. **Serious reflections on the risks of market domination by a US
   politically-assertive technology elite.** We need a new kind of risk
   analysis, re-assessing what we might have considered safe and not at all
   risky, especially at the platform level. This includes preparing for 
   the possibilities of services being terminated for anti-competitive or
   political ends.

2. **Increased commitment to open platforms.** We love open source, and
   use it, but most of our platforms are proprietary. In an ideal world, a
   new company with resources should be able to spin up a new, secure, 
   data centre with administration tools, in a matter of weeks. Let's get 
   away from dependence on the likes of S3, for example. We need agnostic
   alternatives where switching providers is trivial, in the manner of OAuth2.

3. **Greater investment in non-US-owned hosting services.** I loved my time
   using Digital Ocean for hosting. Honestly, the tech is great. But as a
   company, they are subject to US laws, and even though the data centres I use
   are in Canada, they could be shut down by a US government order.

4. **Greater investment in non-US-owned application provision.** Our corporations
   and governments are, more or less, hostage to the big applications, Microsoft's 
   Office, Adobe's Creative Cloud, Google Docs and so on. We're seeing the impact 
   of AI being thrown into them by US corporations right now -- even though that
   has serious privacy risks. We need to tool up to help our political and commercial
   infrastructure escape from their vendor lock-in.

This could be read as a call for increasing local services. It isn't,
necessarily. While I'd personally love to support Canada, that's not the
problem. The problem is the risk of having any one state dominate provision,
particularly when that one state is politically rogue. I'd happily move
services to Germany, or Finland, or Mexico, or Japan, or Scotland. 

For these reasons, regardless of the outcomes of tariffs on goods, I personally
am choosing to move all my services away from US companies, as far as I can.
That's going to be a long haul, but that's okay. 

In effect, **diversity is resilience** -- let's act now to strengthen
alternatives, so that one rogue state doesn't threaten all our futures.

--- 

And on that note, I'm skilled at deployment of complex technology 
applications. If you need a hand or advice migrating systems, 
[contact me](/contact/) -- I'll happily help if I can.
