In partial honour of international standards day, I have long been of the
opinion that the two hardest problems in tech are: first, authentication, and
second, date and time handling. Every time I have to work with either of them I
regret it. Anyway, I have been using some JavaScript processing for supposedly
portable date and time code, and I have discovered a few surprises.

1. Firefox and Safari, even for the exact same locale, display dates in a
   different way. I have no idea why, so don't even ask me, but try the
   following:

```
// In Firefox (and Chrome, Edge, Node.js)
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'long'})).format(Date.now())
"6:00:54 p.m. ADT"

// In Safari (also, as shown in Mac Language & Region settings, set for Canada)
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'long'})).format(Date.now())
"6:00:54 PM ADT"
```

Now, according to my system, the system locale should use `PM` as the day
period, and there doesn't seem to be anything else in Firefox that's
meaningfully configurable, so it certainly appears that Firefox is supplying its
own localization for day periods, independently of the operating system (the Mac
explicitly claims to use `PM` in its control panel).

And while you may be curious, the "a.m." representation is arguably appropriate
-- it is the one explicitly endorsed by *The Canadian Style* as well as most
publications in Canada, even though the US and the UK tend to prefer "AM",
although, oddly, the same guide also prefers the 24 hour clock, which makes the
meridiems somewhat moot.

Interestingly, if you specify a US locale:

```
// In Firefox
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {timeStyle: 'long'})).format(Date.now())
"6:00:54 PM ADT"

// In Safari
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {timeStyle: 'long'})).format(Date.now())
"6:00:54 PM ADT"
```

Therefore, it's something uniquely Canadian. 

Now, that shouldn't matter all that much, but if you are attempting server-side
rendering intermixing with client-side updates, along the lines of SvelteKit,
that opens up some interesting strangeness where the first time you see dates
they're shown as `a.m.` but when updated they magically switch to `AM`. There is
a good case for never ever using server-side rendering on dates -- even if you
do detect the user's locale -- simply because the browser might never be
consistent.

2. It gets worse: intervals

Nowadays, the web standards are pretty good at allowing you to do some work with
date and time intervals. In theory. In practice, displaying them brings its own
mess of issues.

Try this:

```
// In Firefox
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRange(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-17 22:00"))
"7:00 – 10:00 PM" 

> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRange(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-17 22:00"))
"7:00–10:00 p.m."
```

This is actually neat: when the day periods are the same, they get elided. 

Can anyone explain to me why in the name of Puck and all his little pixies that
rendering a range in the US uses spaces around the dash? 

But it gets worse.

Now look what happens when the range crosses a date boundary.

```
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRange(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-18 02:00"))
"9/17/2024, 7:00 PM – 9/18/2024, 2:00 AM" 

> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRange(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-18 02:00"))
"2024-09-17, 7:00 p.m.–2024-09-18, 2:00 a.m." 
```

Now a date is thrown in, because the two times are on different dates. Frankly
this seems weird, especially for a following day. When the end of the range is
on the next day, there's no clear reason to specify it. Note that there are
subtle differences as well as obvious ones: the spacing around the dash is
different, not just the date syntax.

As far as I can tell, this is part of the JavaScript standardization, and it's
frankly crap that there is no way to stop the dates from appearing in a time
range. There is no reasonable way to get `7:00 PM – 2:00 AM` (or its Canadian
equivalent) out of a JavaScript range, it's simply impossible, even though it is
a reasonably common scenario. 

Unless, of course, you cheat. JavaScript doesn't care if the range is literally
*backwards*. So, we could actually make a cheat where if the end of a range is
in a different day we move it to the same day. 

```
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRange(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-17 02:00")) 
"7:00 p.m.–2:00 a.m."
```

To add a small tweak, the standard also defines a function that exposes what's
going on in a little more detail.

```
> (new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-CA', {timeStyle: 'short'}))
    .formatRangeToParts(new Date("2024-09-17 19:00"), new Date("2024-09-17 10:00")) 
[
    {"type":"hour","value":"7","source":"startRange"},
    {"type":"literal","value":":","source":"startRange"},
    {"type":"minute","value":"00","source":"startRange"},
    {"type":"literal","value":" ","source":"startRange"},
    {"type":"dayPeriod","value":"p.m.","source":"startRange"},
    {"type":"literal","value":"–","source":"shared"},
    {"type":"hour","value":"10","source":"endRange"},
    {"type":"literal","value":":","source":"endRange"},
    {"type":"minute","value":"00","source":"endRange"},
    {"type":"literal","value":" ","source":"endRange"},
    {"type":"dayPeriod","value":"a.m.","source":"endRange"}
]
```

But that doesn't help all that much. There is little in the way of semantics,
especially of the literals, which may, or may not, be meaningful according to a
given locale. And, after all, as above, we noticed that spaces may be injected
differently for the locale, so we have to presume these literals are being set
by the locale.

See: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/time#validation

